So let's go over a really useful mnemonic lesson.
I know we've talked about a lot about concavity and inflection points and increasing and decreasing.
And with all of that stuff going on you might be thinking oh is concavity with the first or second derivative
does inflection point have to do with the increase or with the concavity.
And what was the relative extrema again does it go with the second derivative or the first.
So point is there is a lot of stuff going on and I don't want you to confuse interims of what we do
with each derivative.
For that reason I came up with this mnemonic.
So it says to remember what the first and second derivatives each do what you're going to do is you're
going to think about this abbreviation F I R and S E C and you might be thinking OK so how do I remember
those.
Well f I are is just the first three letters of first an S E C is the first three letters of second.
Right.
So if I R and C C so as you might have guessed we're going to use fir to remember what the first derivative
does.
And we're going to use SEC to remember what the second derivative does.
It's that easy.
All right.
So we have
and we have SEC.
All right.
So obviously the F is for first right.
That's how we know we're talking about the first derivative then this is for increasing and decreasing.
And then this R is for relative
extrema see that.
So if you remember fir which again is the first three letters of first for first derivative then you
know the first derivative is the one you used to find increasing and decreasing intervals and also the
one you use to find relative extrema.
We're going to do the same thing for sec.
So the first sac is for second.
Obviously the second derivative then the E.
So right the easy a little bit tricky because what's supposed to go here is inflection points but obviously
it's not an eye it's an E.
So the way I want you to think of this is think of the word inflection.
So what I want you to think about is think of the word inflection as inflection.
The inflection all right
what I don't want to happen is for you to go ahead and say OK inflexions starts with an I.
So inflection would be here no.
And that's a problem.
We have increasing which starts with an eye an inflection which also starts with an eye.
So think of this word as inflection and it's pronounced as reflexion
All right.
And refl. has an E which matches with this E.
So in Fluxion rhymes with re flexion and refl. has this E.
So that's how you know that this e belongs to inflection points and then thankfully the C is pretty
easy it's just concavity.
Isn't that nice.
We can just go ahead and use the actual names first and second to find out what the first derivative
and the second derivative do.
So again for a first derivative for increasing and decreasing and for finding relative extrema.
Remember that relative extrema are the points where the function goes from increasing to decreasing
or vice a versa.
On the other hand we have the SEC.
So sad for the second derivative the second derivative is used to find concavity remember whether the
graph opens up or down and then these inflection points is where the concavity changes.
So you might have noticed a parallel.
Remember that we find relative extrema where the first derivative equals zero or is undefined.
We also find the inflection points where the second derivative is either 0 or undefined.
And then the function goes from increasing to decreasing or vice a versa where the relative extremes
are in the same way.
The function changes concavity from up to down or down to up at the inflection points.
So there's definitely a parallel between intervals of concavity and inflection points and intervals
of increase and decrease and relative extrema just that these two use the first derivative and these
two use the second.
All right so just to give you a quick visual and this is not part of the mnemonic than a Monika's is
the for and the SEC.
All right but just to give you a quick visual for example.
Here the function is increasing increasing.
Then you get to a relative extrema.
So this is our and then it starts decreasing.
All right.
And you could do the same with a minute.
This would just be a max.
But the main would be the same thing.
And here we have something similar.
So we have for example this and this is concave down.
This is concave up and inflection points because that's how I like to call it.
So it makes sense for this mnemonic is right here.
So that for the E is right if you're observant you might have noticed that actually the graph is concave
down here.
And the graph is increasing and decreasing here and then it increases again.
So there is some relation to these concepts.
However notice that for example when the graph is concave down it's it can be both increasing and decreasing
because this whole thing is concave down.
But it has both increasing and decreasing intervals in the same way.
For example this is concave up right here.
And it also has decreasing and then increasing intervals.
So again just an observation nothing to worry about what I want you to take away from this is again
use the mnemonic for and SEC the three letters of first and second and then figure out what each one
does.
In case you ever forget in the middle of your homework in the middle of a test in the middle of your
final practice is going to help you out a lot.
And that's it for this mnemonic.